.\" archward(1) manual page
.\" Keep in sync with docs/cli.md and docs/recovery.md.
.TH ARCHWARD 1 "2026-05-15" "archward 0.4.5" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
archward \- safe-update pipeline and recovery toolset for Arch-based Linux
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B archward
.RI [ flags ]
.br
.B archward
.I command
.RI [ "command options" ]
.br
.B archward-gui
.RI [ \-\-profile
.IR NAME ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B archward
wraps
.B pacman \-Syu
(and an auto-detected AUR helper) in a snapshot \(-> gate \(-> classify
\(-> update \(-> verify pipeline, so a bad update is always recoverable.
.PP
It has two invocation shapes. The
.B flag form
.RB ( "archward " [ flags ])
runs the full update pipeline. The
.B subcommands
.RB ( "archward " \fIcommand\fR )
expose the recovery toolset \(em verify, snapshot inspection, and
rollback \(em so a user whose desktop will not start after an update
can recover from a plain TTY without the GUI.
.PP
Every subcommand works from a non-graphical shell. This is deliberate:
when a kernel or driver update breaks the desktop, recovery happens in
.BR tty1 .
.SH FLAG FORM OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Run snapshot, gates, and risk classification (including AUR pending),
then exit. No update is performed.
.TP
.B \-\-auto
Hands-off: abort the run if HIGH-RISK packages are present instead of
prompting.
.TP
.B \-\-yes
Auto-confirm HIGH-risk approval and recoverable gate overrides. Does
.I not
auto-confirm the boot-critical rollback gate \(em that is a separate,
deliberate decision.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-aur
Skip the AUR phase regardless of the
.B aur.enabled
config setting.
.TP
.BI \-\-profile " NAME"
Use
.IR ~/.config/archward/profiles/ NAME .toml
instead of the default config.
.I NAME
must match
.BR [A\-Za\-z0\-9][A\-Za\-z0\-9_\-]{0,63} .
First run bootstraps the file with defaults. Applies to both the flag
form and subcommands; place it before the subcommand.
.TP
.B \-\-detect
Run distro / kernel / AUR-helper / service detection, propose a config
diff, and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-write\-config
Overwrite the config file with archward defaults and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-help
Print usage and exit.
.PP
.B \-\-dry\-run
and
.B \-\-auto
are mutually exclusive.
.SH SUBCOMMANDS
.SS archward verify [\-\-snapshot ID]
Re-run the verify phase against an existing snapshot. No new snapshot
is taken and no update is performed. This is the post-reboot
diagnostic \(em it catches failures that only manifest after the
kernel actually boots: DKMS modules that did not rebuild, mkinitcpio
hooks that did not fire, .pacnew files left unmerged, systemd unit
syntax changes.
.TP
.BI \-\-snapshot " ID"
Verify against this snapshot directory name. Default: the latest
snapshot.
.PP
Runs every built-in check plus all discovered verify plugins (the
.B archward.verify_checks
entry-point group). Built-in universal checks include
.B rollback\-cache
(FAIL if a cache-cleaning hook or aggressive paccache policy deleted
the pre-update package files archward's downgrade path needs),
.B boot\-integrity
(FAIL if an initramfs is older than its kernel \(em the
mkinitcpio/dracut pacman hook did not run and the machine may not
boot; grub.cfg mtime is deliberately not checked, as it legitimately
predates the kernel with stable kernel filenames; SKIPped when there
is no flavour-named initramfs or no /boot),
.B orphans
(WARN if any packages are installed as dependencies but no longer required
by anything \(em use
.B pacman \-Qdtq
to list them and
.B pacman \-Rns
to remove), and
.B security\-advisories
(FAIL on Critical/High or WARN on Medium/Low open Arch Security
Advisories affecting installed packages; SKIPped when
.B arch\-audit
is installed or the network is unreachable).
The full pipeline also raises an overridable pre-flight warning when
the pacman-cache policy would make the upcoming update non-recoverable,
and fetches the Arch News RSS feed to warn of items posted since your
last update. An incomplete snapshot (missing
.B .timestamp ,
empty
.B packages/all.txt ,
or no
.B configs/ )
is refused up front with exit 3, naming the missing section.
.B packages/critical.txt
is not required \(em it is reconstructed from
.B all.txt
plus the kernel patterns, so snapshots that predate it stay usable.
.SS archward snapshot list [\-\-limit N | \-\-all]
Print a newest-first table of snapshots: id, age, distro, kernel,
captured-config count. Default shows the 20 newest;
.B \-\-all
shows every snapshot. Incomplete directories (no
.B .timestamp
marker) are filtered out.
.SS archward snapshot show ID
Full detail for one snapshot: meta block, captured config paths with
sizes, and the critical-package list with versions. Use this to find
the filename to pass to
.B archward rollback config
and to compare snapshot package versions against the installed set.
.SS archward snapshot prune [\-\-keep N] [\-\-yes]
Delete old snapshots, keeping the
.I N
newest (default:
.BR cfg.general.keep_snapshots ).
Without
.BR \-\-yes ,
lists the snapshots to be deleted and asks for confirmation.
.SS archward rollback config ID FILENAME
Restore one captured config to its live
.I /etc
location, preserving the live file's ownership and mode. A
.B .pre\-rollback.bak
of the live file is written first, so the operation is reversible.
.I FILENAME
accepts either the captured snapshot filename
.RB ( mirrorlist )
or the full live relpath
.RB ( etc/pacman.d/mirrorlist ).
.SS archward rollback package ID PKG [\-\-confirm\-boot\-critical]
Downgrade or upgrade one package to its snapshot version, from
.IR /var/cache/pacman/pkg/ .
Boot-critical packages (glibc, systemd, openssl, and their lib32 /
\-libs variants) require
.B \-\-confirm\-boot\-critical
.I and
a case-sensitive
.B YES
typed on stdin. archward never fetches from the network; if the
cached version is gone, see the
.B EXAMPLES
section.
.SS archward rollback all\-configs ID [\-\-yes]
Restore every captured config in one pass. Auto-takes a pre-rollback
snapshot first so the bulk operation is itself reversible. Per-file
failures are reported but do not abort the rest.
.SS archward rollback all\-packages ID [\-\-confirm\-boot\-critical]
Single atomic
.B pacman \-U
over every package whose snapshot version differs from current.
Auto-takes a pre-rollback snapshot first. Prints the full plan before
acting. Boot-critical packages in the plan require
.B \-\-confirm\-boot\-critical
and a stdin
.BR YES .
.SS archward aur quarantine list
Print a table of all AUR build quarantine entries (active and resolved).
Columns: package, version, status (counting / quarantined / resolved),
failure count, retry-after or resolved date, and last error snippet.
No sudo required. Exit 0 always; an empty state is not an error.
.SS archward aur quarantine clear [PKG] [\-\-yes]
Clear one or all active quarantine entries (status \(-> resolved).
Without
.IR PKG ,
clears every counting + quarantined entry (asks for confirmation unless
.B \-\-yes
is given).
With
.IR PKG ,
clears that package; exits 2 if it is not found in the quarantine state.
Resolved entries cannot be "re-cleared" (exit 0, no-op).
.SS archward pacnew list
Scan
.I /etc
for
.B .pacnew
files and print each with its rule-classified strategy and note.
.SS archward pacnew diff PATH
Unified diff of the live config versus its
.BR .pacnew .
.I PATH
accepts either form.
.SS archward pacnew apply PATH \-\-strategy=STRATEGY
Apply a resolution.
.I STRATEGY
is one of:
.BR keep_ours
(discard the .pacnew),
.BR take_new
(replace the live file, preserving ownership + mode),
.BR edit
(open both in
.BR $VISUAL / $EDITOR ),
or
.BR leave
(no-op).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.SS Flag form
.TP
.B 0
RESULT:SUCCESS / RESULT:PACNEW_MERGE_NEEDED / RESULT:NEEDS_REVIEW
.TP
.B 1
RESULT:UPDATE_FAILED / RESULT:VERIFY_FAILED
.TP
.B 2
RESULT:REBOOT_NEEDED (informational; user must reboot)
.SS Subcommands
.TP
.B 0
success, or the user declined a confirmation (a valid choice)
.TP
.B 1
operation failed (verify FAIL, pacman \-U non-zero, restore error)
.TP
.B 2
invalid args or refused (boot-critical without
.BR \-\-confirm\-boot\-critical ,
unknown filename / package / pacnew action)
.TP
.B 3
snapshot not found or incomplete (missing
.BR .timestamp )
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/archward/config.toml
Default configuration. Auto-created on first run.
.TP
.I ~/.config/archward/profiles/<NAME>.toml
Alternate profiles, selected with
.BR \-\-profile .
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/archward/snapshots/
Per-update snapshots. Each is a timestamped directory.
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/archward/logs/archward.log
Rotating run log. The post-reboot recovery breadcrumb is written here.
.TP
.I ~/.local/state/archward/aur_quarantine.json
AUR build quarantine state. Keyed by package name; tracks failure counts,
retry windows, and resolved history. Managed by the AUR phase and the
.B archward aur quarantine
subcommand.
.TP
.I /var/cache/pacman/pkg/
Source for package downgrades. archward is cache-only by policy.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Diagnose a system that booted into a black screen, from tty1:
.PP
.nf
.RS
archward snapshot list
archward verify \-\-snapshot 2026\-05\-15_134329
.RE
.fi
.PP
Roll back the package the verify FAIL implicated:
.PP
.nf
.RS
archward rollback package 2026\-05\-15_134329 nvidia
archward verify
.RE
.fi
.PP
Bulk-restore a known-good state (auto-takes a pre-rollback snapshot):
.PP
.nf
.RS
archward rollback all\-packages 2026\-05\-15_134329
.RE
.fi
.PP
The cached package was pruned \(em pull it from the Arch Linux Archive:
.PP
.nf
.RS
# https://archive.archlinux.org/packages/n/nvidia/
sudo pacman \-U /tmp/nvidia\-575.64.05\-1\-x86_64.pkg.tar.zst
archward verify
.RE
.fi
.PP
Resolve a forgotten .pacnew:
.PP
.nf
.RS
archward pacnew list
archward pacnew diff /etc/ssh/sshd_config.pacnew
archward pacnew apply /etc/ssh/sshd_config \-\-strategy=take_new
.RE
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
Full task-oriented recovery walkthrough and CLI reference:
.PP
.nf
.RS
https://github.com/indyfive11/archward/blob/main/docs/recovery.md
https://github.com/indyfive11/archward/blob/main/docs/cli.md
.RE
.fi
.PP
.BR pacman (8),
.BR paccache (8)
.SH AUTHOR
indyfive11. Source and issue tracker:
https://github.com/indyfive11/archward
